DOC-3698: Improvements to Mission Mars flows tutorial (#469)
corda/corda-docs-portal: content/en/platform/corda/5.0-dev-preview-1/tutorials/building-cordapp/c5-basic-cordapp-flows.md

title: Write flows
---

> In Corda, flows automate the process of agreeing ledger updates. They are a sequence of steps that tell the node how to achieve a specific ledger update, such as issuing an asset or making a deposit. Nodes communicate using these flows in point-to-point interactions, rather than a global broadcast system. Network participants must specify what information needs to be sent, to which counterparties. However, flows are not specifically about a single node, it is getting the network to update the relevant ledgers.

Reviewer: They don't tell "the node", they tell a group of nodes how to mutate the ledger as. whole. Each node enacts a part of the transaction.

Author: updates and removed the last sentence as it's covered by the changes.

title: Write flows
---

> In Corda, flows automate the process of agreeing ledger updates. They are a sequence of steps that tell a group of nodes how to achieve a specific ledger update, such as issuing an asset or making a deposit. Each node enacts as part of the transaction and they communicate using these flows in point-to-point interactions, rather than a global broadcast system. Network participants must specify what information needs to be sent, to which counterparties.

Reviewer 2: "Each node enacts as part of the transaction" doesn't sound right. Not sure enacts is the right word here.

Author: updated

> Top-level flows that we're interested in in this tutorial encapsulate the business logic behind the interaction between the users and your CorDapp. They can have multiple subflows and can be started via RPC. However, not all top-level flows rule interactions with users, some could be, for example, admin or maintenance flows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, top-level flows refer to those that encapsulate the business logic behind the interaction between the users and your CorDapp. They can have multiple subflows and can be started via RPC. However, not all top-level flows govern interactions with users, some could be admin or maintenance flows for example.
```

> The Corda-provided subflows are common tasks performed in Corda, such as gathering signatures from counterparty nodes or notarising and recording a transaction. As a developer, you only need to implement flows for the business logic of your specific use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Corda-provided subflows are common tasks performed in Corda, such as gathering signatures from counterparty nodes or notarizing and recording a transaction. As a developer, you only need to implement flows for the business logic of your specific use case.
```

> In Corda, flows automate the process of agreeing ledger updates. They are a sequence of steps that tell the node how to achieve a specific ledger update, such as issuing an asset or making a deposit. Nodes communicate using these flows in point-to-point interactions, rather than a global broadcast system. Network participants must specify what information needs to be sent, to which counterparties.

Reviewer: They're not specifically about a single node, its getting the network to update the relevant ledgers

Author: updated

> Top-level flows encapsulate the business logic behind the interaction between the users and your CorDapp. They can have multiple subflows and can be started via RPC.

Reviewer: *some* top level flows, not all flows are for "users", some could be admin, maintenence etc

Author: added this info

> Top-level flows encapsulate the business logic behind the interaction between the users and your CorDapp. They can have multiple subflows and can be started via RPC.

Reviewer: not sure mentioning sub-flows here makes sense, it doesn't add to the information. Bring sub flows in when that "need" of the programmer crops up.

i.e. "need to do this in a flow" answe3r: Sub Flows

Author: It's just one simple sentence. Leaving as is.

> Subflows or built-in flows are common tasks performed in Corda, such as gathering signatures from counterparty nodes or notarising and recording a transaction. As a developer, you only need to implement flows for the business logic of your specific use case.

Author: changed

In this sample CorDapp, add these services:

> * `FlowEngine`: Provides basic control over a flow it is injected into, such as calling subflows, performing asynchronous tasks and putting the flow to sleep for a period of time.

Reviewer: none of these discuss *why* I'd want to import them. The description is good, but itr's missing the obvious next step of "because we need to do this and this is covered by this service". I'm not a big fan of things where boilerplate becomes dogma, I'd want to encourage people to think about what they're injecting because they ahve problem X that is solved by Y

Author: @peterli-r3 could you please specify what problems injecting these services solves?

Reviewer 3: This flow needs flowEngine because we are utilizing subflows such as finality and CollectSignaturesFlow. 
- needs FlowIdentity because one of the output state needs our own identity. 
- needs FlowMessaging to create flow sessions talking to counterparties. 
- needs TransactionBuilderFactory because this flow builds a transaction. 
- needs IdentityService because this flow involved counterparties. 
- needs NotaryLookupService because the transaction we build in this flow requires notary. 
- need JsonMarshallingService because the in Corda 5 all flows parameters are in the format of JSON.

Author: updated. @peterli-r3 could you pls review?

> * `FlowIdentity`: Allows obtaining the identity of the node running the flow. You must inject this service because one of the output states needs its own identity.

Reviewer 2: Do we need the "allows". Does it change the meaning if we simply say "Obtains" instead?
Same comment for points below.

* `FlowMessaging`: Allows creating and closing flow sessions as well as sending and receiving data between flows via a flow session. Use this service to create flow sessions that allow communication between counterparties.

> * `TransactionBuilderFactory`: Used for constructing, verifying and signing the transactions. In this case, it builds a transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `TransactionBuilderFactory`: Constructs, verifies and signs the transactions. In this case, it builds a transaction.
```

> * `FlowIdentity`

Author: @peterli-r3 Could you please explain why do I want to add those services and add short description of what each service does?

Reviewer 3: These service are the services that a Corda flow would need. In Corda 4, all of the services are automatically running behind the scene. However, in Corda 5, these services are invoked more agilely. You can only inject the services that the flow needs. This will make the flow more light weighted. 
---
short description: I cant. these should come from enginner.

Author: Added descs obtained from @conalsmith-r3

    lateinit var jsonMarshallingService: JsonMarshallingService
```

#### Write your business logic

##### Add the flow implementation

Next you must add the flow implementation to the initiating flow by encapsulating it within the `call` method.

1. Add the `@Suspendable` annotation.
2. Add the `call` method with the return type `SignedTransactionDigest`.
3. Parse your parameters using the `mapOfParams` value. Since the parameters the flow will use come in JSON format, the JSON object must be parsed to extract the parameters so the flow can run.
4. Add appropriate error handling - exceptions must be thrown when required fields (`voucherDesc`, `holder`, `recipientParty`) are not found.

> 5. Insert the following method for finding the notary: `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.<notary name>()`.

Author: @peterli-r3 We Should not be using `.first ` in the method for getting the notary so I changed `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.first()` to `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.<notary name>()` here and in the code. Is that correct or what is the name of the notary I'm looking for?

Reviewer 3: ok. I will change the code.

Reviewer 3: Ummmm. I actually need ask Engineering about it...

Author: updated the tutorial with notaryLookup.getNotary(CordaX500Name.parse("O=notary, L=London, C=GB"))!!

> 5. Insert the following method for finding the notary: `notaryLookup.getNotary(CordaX500Name.parse("O=notary, L=London, C=GB"))!!`.

Reviewer: might want a breakout box that mentions what notary to find etc

Author: @peterli-r3 could you pls specify this one?

Reviewer 3: The notary in Corda 5 DP1 was pre-defined. You can find the full status of the notary by start the network and print out the status of the network.

Reviewer: That's too literal @peterli-r3 

We should discuss a little what this means, i.e. we will be "spending" our state with a particular notary tieing that state to it (notary change excepted). thus, we can't just "pick the first one" as the list order may change, especially in a multi-network / app environment where different notaries are whilsatestied for different apps. 

We are tryign to teach people how to write an app, not duplicate the DP example

Author: added a note. @peterli-r3 and @fenryka please review

6. Build the output `MarsVoucher` state with a `UniqueIdentifier`.

##### Build the transaction

> Your transaction is a proposal to the ledger that the counterparty must agree to. You must ensure that the proposal adheres the rules of the smart contract and sign it before sending it to the counterparty. The proposal here is that you'll create a voucher for a trip to Mars and then issue that voucher to a designated party - Peter.

Reviewer: counterparty and notary

Reviewer: well, the notary won't agree, but i twill validate

Author: added notary

> Your transaction is a proposal to the ledger that the counterparty must agree to. You must ensure that the proposal adheres the rules of the smart contract and sign it before sending it to the counterparty. The proposal here is that you'll create a voucher for a trip to Mars and then issue that voucher to a designated party - Peter.

Reviewer: You must also ensure it is valid from a business perspective. If you, for example, offer to give me a million dollars in return for nothing, I'll accept, and its a valid transaction, but maybe we should encourage people to think about things like this up front

Author: added

1. Build the transaction using a `txCommand` and the `transactionBuilderFactory` service you added when injecting services.
2. Verify that the transaction is valid using the `txBuilder.verify` method.

> 3. Sign the transaction using the `txBuilder.sign` method.

Author: explained

##### Interact with the counterparty

> This is where you send the proposal to Peter. When consensus that the transaction's elements are unique and understood is achieved, the transaction is notarized in both parties' vaults.

Reviewer: it's Peters node, not Peter

> This is where you send the proposal to Peter. When consensus that the transaction's elements are unique and understood is achieved, the transaction is notarized in both parties' vaults.

Author: updated

> 1. Send the state to the counterparty and receive it back with their signature. Use the `flowMessaging` service to send the state to the `recipientParty`. Use the `flowEngine` service with the subflow `CollectSignaturesFlow` to get the signature of the counterparty.

Reviewer: should mention they should handle the case where the counterparty rejects the transaction.

Author: added

Reviewer: its not in the code - arguably it should be

There is no thought there to nongolden path execution. Yes, in this *specific* app there is no chance for the counterparty to reject, but that's this app. Again, we should be teaching people how to write CorDapps, not replicate this one by rote.

Author: updated the note

2. Get the transaction notarized and recorded in both parties' vaults using `FinalityFlow` with a `fullySignedTx`.

> 3. Return a `SignedTransactionDigest`. Use the `jsonMarshallingService` to parse the transaction's output. Include the transaction's output states, ID, and signatures.

Reviewer: mention this bit is optional and only relevent to RPC invokeed flows as a way to return data to some interface

Author: updated

    lateinit var jsonMarshallingService: JsonMarshallingService
```

#### Write your business logic

##### Add the flow implementation

Next you must add the flow implementation to the initiating flow by encapsulating it within the `call` method.

1. Add the `@Suspendable` annotation.
2. Add the `call` method with the return type `SignedTransactionDigest`.
3. Parse your parameters using the `mapOfParams` value. Since the parameters the flow will use come in JSON format, the JSON object must be parsed to extract the parameters so the flow can run.
4. Add appropriate error handling - exceptions must be thrown when required fields (`voucherDesc`, `holder`, `recipientParty`) are not found.
5. Insert the following method for finding the notary: `notaryLookup.getNotary(CordaX500Name.parse("O=notary, L=London, C=GB"))!!`.

{{< note >}}

> In Corda 5 the notary is predefined. You will be "spending" your state with a particular notary tieing that state to it (notary change excepted). Thus, you cannot just pick the first one as the list order may change, especially in a multi-network or app environment where different notaries are whitelisted for different apps. You can find the full status of the notary by starting the network and printing out its status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Corda 5, the notary is predefined. You will be "spending" your state with a particular notary tieing that state to it (notary change excepted). Thus, you cannot just pick the first one as the list order may change, especially in a multi-network or app environment where different notaries are whitelisted for different apps. You can find the full status of the notary by starting the network and printing out its status.
```

{{< /note >}}

6. Build the output `MarsVoucher` state with a `UniqueIdentifier`.

##### Build the transaction

Your transaction is a proposal to the ledger that the counterparty must agree to. You must ensure that the proposal adheres to the rules of the smart contract and you must sign it before sending it to the counterparty. Also, ensure your transaction is valid from a business perspective. The proposal here is that you'll create a voucher for a trip to Mars and then issue that voucher to a notary and a designated party - Peter.

1. Build the transaction using a `txCommand` and the `transactionBuilderFactory` service you added when injecting services.
2. Verify that the transaction is valid using the `txBuilder.verify` method.
3. Sign the transaction using the `txBuilder.sign` method.
   Once the transaction is signed, you cannot remove a signature from it.

##### Interact with the counterparty

> This is where you send the proposal to Peter. When consensus that the transaction's elements are unique and understood is achieved, the transaction is notarized by the notary and stored in both parties' vaults.

Reviewer 2: "When consensus that the transaction's elements are unique and understood is achieved", this part doesn't quite make sense. Not sure what it should say though.

### Write the responder flow

Now that you've written the initiating flow, write the responder flow that responds to the request to update the ledger. The responder flow in the `CreateAndIssueMarsVoucher` flow is very simple and in the context of the Mission Mars CorDapp, you don't need to verify anything. However, when signing a responder flow in a "real-life context", do not sign it before verifying its contents and ensuring you are accepting what you want to accept.

1. Add the `@InitiatedBy` annotation. This indicates that this is the responder flow.

> 2. Add in a responder flow:

Author: @peterli-r3 Could you please give a description of what's happening in the responder flow?

Reviewer 3: When the responder receives a half signed transaction from an initiating party, the responder flow is most likely being asked to sign the transaction. So one thing the responder flow will do is to go through some checks on the transaction (implemented in the responder flow), and if all the checks are passed, it will sign the transaction and return back to the initiating party. The second thing a responder will do is to receive and record a fully signed transaction to its local ledger (database). This is done by the ReceiveFinalityFlow subflow.

Author: added

Now that you've written the `CreateAndIssueMarsVoucher` flow, try writing the `CreateBoardingTicket` flow.

> You will need these variables:

Author: @peterli-r3 Why and what they do? Are these variables to a function or to a class?

Reviewer 3: These variables are part of the story. There is no why and what they do. They are just variables, that carry information. 

They are variables of the createboardingticket flow.

Reviewer: yes, but what part of the business problem are they solving such that they need to be "on ledger" facts. Given days to launch is clealry temporal, why sign it to the ledger etc.

Reviewer 3: Fair point. I will change it to the launch date. As flight ticket should have date&time.

Author: changed in code. updated tutorial.

Now that you've written the `CreateAndIssueMarsVoucher` flow, try writing the `CreateBoardingTicket` flow.

You will need these variables:

* `ticketDescription`
* `launchDate`

You must inject these services:

* `FlowEngine`: Provides basic control over a flow it is injected into, such as calling subflows, performing asynchronous tasks and putting the flow to sleep for a period of time. This flow needs `FlowEngine` because you are utilizing subflows such as `FinalityFlow`.

> * `FlowIdentity`: Allows obtaining the identity of the node running the flow. You must inject this service because one of the output states needs its own identity.

Reviewer 2: Same comment about starting some of these with "allows". It doesn't read well...

Author: changed

Start writing your initiating flow following the same process used when writing the <a href="#write-the-createandissuemarsvoucher-flow">`CreateAndIssueMarsVoucher`</a> flow.

1. Add these annotations: `@InitiatingFlow`, `@StartableByRPC`.

2. Define the `RedeemBoardingTicketWithVoucherInitiator` class with a `@JsonConstructor`, `RpcStartFlowRequestParameters`, and returning a `SignedTransactionDigest`.

> 3. Inject these services:

Author: @peterli-r3 Could you please explain why do I want to add those services and add short description of what each service does?

Reviewer 3: same as my above comment

Author: Added descs obtained from @conalsmith-r3

    * `FlowEngine`
    * `FlowIdentity`
    * `FlowMessaging`
    * `TransactionBuilderFactory`
    * `IdentityService`: Provides methods to retrieve `Party` and `AnonymousParty` instances.
    * `NotaryLookupService`
    * `JsonMarshallingService`: Parses arbitrary content in and out of JSON using standard, approved mappers.
    * `PersistenceService`

4. Add the `@Suspendable` annotation.
5. Encapsulate the flow implementation into a call method that returns the `SignedTransactionDigest`.

6. Parse these parameters and add exceptions for when these parameters are incorrect or not present:
    * `voucherID`
    * `holder`
    * `recipientParty`

> 7. Insert the following method for finding the notary: `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.<notary name>()`

Author: We Should not be using `.first ` in the method for getting the notary so I changed `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.first()` to `notaryLookup.notaryIdentities.<notary name>()` here and in the code. Is that correct or what is the name of the notary I'm looking for?

Reviewer 3: I actually need ask Engineering about it...

Reviewer 3: same^

Author: updated the tutorial with notaryLookup.getNotary(CordaX500Name.parse("O=notary, L=London, C=GB"))!!

Start writing your initiating flow following the same process used when writing the <a href="#write-the-createandissuemarsvoucher-flow">`CreateAndIssueMarsVoucher`</a> flow.

1. Add these annotations:

>    * `@InitiatingFlow`: This indicates that this flow is the initiating flow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * `@InitiatingFlow`: Indicates that this flow is the initiating flow.
```

>    * `@StartableByRPC`: This annotation allows the flow to be started by RPC. You **must** use this annotation if you want to run the flow with the RPC Client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * `@StartableByRPC`: Allows the flow to be started by RPC. You **must** use this annotation if you want to run the flow with the RPC Client.
```

2. Define the `RedeemBoardingTicketWithVoucherInitiator` class with a `@JsonConstructor`, `RpcStartFlowRequestParameters`, and returning a `SignedTransactionDigest`.
3. Inject these services:

    * `FlowEngine`: Provides basic control over a flow it is injected into, such as calling subflows, performing asynchronous tasks and putting the flow to sleep for a period of time. This flow needs `FlowEngine` because you are utilizing subflows such as `FinalityFlow` and `CollectSignaturesFlow`.

>     * `FlowIdentity`: Allows obtaining the identity of the node running the flow. You must inject this service because one of the output states needs its own identity.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as before about using allows, rather than just obtains.

    * `FlowMessaging`: Allows creating and closing flow sessions as well as sending and receiving data between flows via a flow session. Use this service to create flow sessions that allow communication between counterparties.
    * `TransactionBuilderFactory`: Used for constructing, verifying and signing the transactions. In this case, it builds a transaction.
    * `IdentityService`: Provides methods to retrieve `Party` and `AnonymousParty` instances. You need it because your flow involves counterparties.
    * `NotaryLookupService`: Allows finding information on notaries in the network. Add it because your transaction requires a notary.
    * `JsonMarshallingService`: Parses arbitrary content in and out of JSON using standard, approved mappers. You need it because in Corda 5 all flow parameters are in the JSON format.

>     * `PersistenceService`: Provides an API for interacting with the database. It has functions mirroring Java's EntityManager for working with entities. Also, it provides functions for executing predefined named queries and polling for results. It hides the complexity of asynchronously interacting with the database which in a HA environment could be running on a separate process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `PersistenceService`: Provides an API for interacting with the database. It has functions mirroring Java's `EntityManager` for working with entities. Also, it provides functions for executing predefined named queries and polling for results. It hides the complexity of asynchronously interacting with the database which, in a high-availability environment, could be running on a separate process.
```

1. Use a `cursor` to point to a specific line in the query results.
2. Add a `persistenceService.query` to get the `StateAndRef` of the `MarsVoucher`.
3. Use the [predefined query](../../../../../../en/platform/corda/5.0-dev-preview-1/cordapps/persistence/query-api.html#query-for-states-when-your-state-does-not-have-a-mapped-schema) `findByUuidAndStateStatus` to find the `MarsVoucher` you need by the state's unique identifier and status.
4. Because you need to return a `StateAndRef`, use Corda's built-in `Corda.IdentityStateAndRefPostProcessor`.

> 5. Because you need to return a `ContractState`, use Corda's built-in `IdentityContractStatePostProcessor`.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Because you need to return a `ContractState`, use Corda's built-in `IdentityContractStatePostProcessor`.
```
@peterli-r3 Is this correct?

Reviewer 3: I would not use the word because. I dont know if that is a cause and affect relationship.

Author: updated

6. Use the `poll` function to set a maximum poll size and timeout duration for the query.

##### Add a query for the `BoardingTicket`

1. Use an additional cursor (`cursor2`) to point to a specific line in the query results.
2. Add a `persistenceService.query` to get the `StateAndRef` of the `BoardingTicket`.
3. Use the [predefined query](../../../../../../en/platform/corda/5.0-dev-preview-1/cordapps/persistence/query-api.html#query-for-states-when-your-state-does-not-have-a-mapped-schema) `findByStateStatusAndContractStateClassName` to find the `BoardingTicket` you need by the state's status and contract state class name.
4. Because you need to return a `StateAndRef`, use Corda's built-in `Corda.IdentityStateAndRefPostProcessor`.

> 5. Because you need to return a `ContractState`, use Corda's built-in `IdentityContractStatePostProcessor`.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Because you need to return a `ContractState`, use Corda's built-in `IdentityContractStatePostProcessor`.
```
@peterli-r3 Is this correct?

Reviewer 3: same as above.

Author: updated

2. Build the transaction using the `TransactionBuilderFactory` service.
3. Verify that the transaction is valid with the `txBuilder.verify` method.
4. Sign the transaction using the `txBuilder.sign` method.
5. Send the state to Peter using the `flowMessaging` service, then receive it using the `FlowEngine` and the subflow `CollectSignaturesFlow`.
6. Get the transaction notarized in both parties' vaults using the `FlowEngine` service and the subflow `FinalityFlow`.
   After the transaction is performed, the issuer will have the consumed state in their vault and they won't have a reference to the new state. The new state generated by this transaction will be stored in the counterparty's vault.

> 7. Return a `SignedTransactionDigest`.

Author: @peterli-r3 could you please explain a bit more why (apart from the fact that once you sign the transaction you can't go back) it's such an important step?

Reviewer 3: which step is an such important step?

Author: added a note and resolved it myself
